[DOCS] How to migrate to node roles from node attrs. Closes #65855 (#71160)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/data-management/migrate-index-allocation-filters.asciidoc

[role="xpack"]
[[migrate-index-allocation-filters]]
== Migrate index allocation filters to node roles

If you currently use custom node attributes and
<<shard-allocation-filtering, attribute-based allocation filters>> to
move indices through <<data-tiers, data tiers>> in a hot-warm-cold architecture,
we recommend that you switch to using the built-in node roles
and automatic <<data-tier-shard-filtering, data tier allocation>>.
Using node roles enables {ilm-init} to automatically

> move indices between data tiers.

Author: I think it's not necessary for the intro--it's called out & linked further down.

When you add a data tier to an {ess} deployment,
new nodes are automatically assigned to the tier.
To change the role of an existing node in an {ess} deployment, use the
{cloud}/ec-api-deployment-crud.html#ec_update_a_deployment[Update deployment API].
Replace the node's `node_type` configuration with the appropriate `node_roles`.
For example, the following configuration adds the node to the hot and content
tiers, and enables it to act as an ingest node, remote, and transform node.

[source,yaml]
----
"node_roles": [
  "data_hot",
  "data_content",
  "ingest",
  "remote_cluster_client",
  "transform"
],
----

If you are directly managing your own cluster,
configure the appropriate roles for each node in `elasticsearch.yml`.
For example, the following setting configures a node to be a data-only
node in the hot and content tiers.

[source,yaml]
----
node.roles [ data_hot, data_content ]
----

[discrete]
[[remove-custom-allocation-settings]]
=== Remove custom allocation settings from your {ilm-init} policy

Update the allocate action for each phase to remove the attribute-based
allocation settings. If the allocate action does not set the number of replicas,

> remove the allocate action entirely. (An empty allocate action is invalid.)

Reviewer: Should we provide just a bit more context here? 

Namely, it's a bit unclear to me which policy are we talking about. If we expand and slightly duplicate the automatic data tier migration text here to reinforce the general goal, maybe it'll be a bit clearer we're talking about all _existing_ policies?

I'm thinking something along the lines of:
```
=== Remove custom allocation settings from your existing {ilm-init} policies

Update the allocate action for each phase to remove the attribute-based
allocation settings. This will enable the migrate action to be injected
in each ILM phase and allow {ilm-init} to automatically transition the indices
through the data tiers.

If the allocate action does not set the number of replicas,
remove the allocate action entirely (an empty allocate action is invalid)
```

What do you think?

IMPORTANT: The policy must specify the corresponding phase for each data tier in
your architecture.
For example, if you enable the warm and cold data tiers for a deployment, your
policy must include the hot, warm, and cold phases.
This is necessary for {ilm-init} to automatically inject the <<ilm-migrate,
migrate>> action to move indices through the data tiers,
even if you don't need to perform any other actions and the phase is empty.

[discrete]
[[stop-setting-custom-hot-attribute]]
=== Stop setting the custom hot attribute on new indices

When you create a data stream, its first backing index
is now automatically assigned to `data_hot` nodes.
Similarly, when you directly create an index, it
is automatically assigned to `data_content` nodes.

On {ess} deployments, remove the `cloud-hot-warm-allocation-0` index template
that set the hot shard allocation attribute on all indices.

[source,console]
----
DELETE _template/.cloud-hot-warm-allocation-0
----

> If you're using a custom index template, update it to remove the node attribute
> you used to assign new indices to the hot tier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using a custom index template, update it to remove the <<shard-allocation-filtering, attribute-based allocation filters>> you used to assign new indices to the hot tier.
```

[discrete]
[[set-tier-preference]]
=== Set a tier preference for existing indices.

{ilm-init} automatically transitions managed indices through the available
data tiers by automatically injecting a <<ilm-migrate,migrate action>>
into each phase.

To enable {ilm-init} to move an _existing_ managed index
through the data tiers, update the index settings to:

. Remove the custom allocation filter by setting it to `null`.

> . Set the `_tier_preference`.

Reviewer: Shall we link <<data-tier-shard-filtering, _tier_preference>> this here?

For example, if your old template set the `data` attribute to `hot`
to allocate shards to the hot tier, set the `data` attribute to `null`

> and set the `_tier_preference` to `data_hot`.

Reviewer: At the time of migration, it's possible/likely that some indices are quite far away in their ILM lifecycle (in the `warm` or `cold` phase already). These indices would have the `warm` data attribute configured by the "old style" `allocate` action from the `warm` ILM phase.

I think it'd be valuable to include an example for the `warm` data attribute in the context of indices that already transitioned to the `warm` phase in their current ILM lifecycles at the time of migration. This example would also illustrate the corresponding `_tier_preference` configuration `"data_warm,data_hot"`

and automatic <<data-tier-allocation, data tier allocation>>.
Using node roles enables {ilm-init} to automatically
move indices between data tiers.

NOTE: While we recommend relying on automatic data tier allocation to manage
your data in a hot-warm-cold architecture,
you can still use attribute-based allocation filters to
control shard allocation for other purposes.

To switch to using node roles:

. <<assign-data-tier, Assign data nodes>> to the appropriate data tier.
. <<remove-custom-allocation-settings, Remove the attribute-based allocation
settings>> from your {ilm} policy.
. <<stop-setting-custom-hot-attribute, Stop setting the custom hot attribute>>
on new indices.
. Update existing indices to <<set-tier-preference, set a tier preference>>.

[discrete]
[[assign-data-tier]]
=== Assign data nodes to a data tier

Configure the appropriate roles for each data node to assign it to one or more
data tiers: `data_hot`, `data_content`, `data_warm`, `data_cold`, or `data_frozen`.
A node can also have other <<modules-node,roles>>. By default, new nodes are
configured with all roles.

When you add a data tier to an {ess} deployment,

> new nodes are automatically assigned to the tier.

Reviewer: This is only true for the `hot` tier (`data_hot` node role). New indices are always allocated to the hot (or content) tier irrespective of the user adding the warm or cold tier. Shall we be more specific here?

Author: The point I was trying to make was that when you add a tier to your deployment, nodes are configured with the corresponding role automatically. I tweaked the wording to make that clearer.

[role="xpack"]
[[migrate-index-allocation-filters]]
== Migrate index allocation filters to node roles

If you currently use custom node attributes and routing allocation filters to move indices

> through data tiers in a hot-warm-cold architecture, we recommend that you switch to using node roles.

Reviewer: I think we should link to the node filtering attributes and corresponding hot-warm-cold architecture blog post (https://www.elastic.co/blog/implementing-hot-warm-cold-in-elasticsearch-with-index-lifecycle-management) and the data tiers page.

The built-in node roles enable {ilm-init} to automatically migrate indices between data tiers.

> You no longer need to explicitly invoke the allocate action in your {ilm-init} policies.

Reviewer: I think this comes with some caveats - ie. allocate action can still exist if it only specifies `number_of_replicas`. I think we should explain that? And link to the `migrate` ILM action?

> NOTE: While index allocation filters are no longer the best way to manage your data

Reviewer: I'm not sure we should say it's not "the best way" but rather not the "recommended" way - and maybe link to the data tiers page for more context?

. Assign your nodes to the appropriate data tier using the `data_hot`, `data_warm`,
`data_cold`, and `data_frozen` roles.
When you add a data tier to an {ess} deployment, this is done automatically.
You can change the role of an existing node in an {ess} deployment with the
{cloud}/ec-api-deployment-crud.html#ec_update_a_deployment[Update deployment API].
If you are directly managing your own cluster,
configure the appropriate data role for each node in `elasticsearch.yml`.
. Update your {ilm-init} policy to:
.. Remove the {ilm-init} allocate action from each phase in your index lifecycle policy.
.. Ensure the policy specifies the corresponding phase for each data tier in your architecture.
For example, if you enable the warm and cold data tiers for a deployment, your policy must
include the hot, warm, and cold phases.
This is necessary for {ilm-init} to automatically move indices through the data tiers,
even if you don't need to perform any other actions and the phase is empty.
. Update your index template to remove the custom node attribute you used to assign new indices
to the hot tier. New indices are automatically assigned to `data_content` nodes, and new backing

> indices for data streams are automatically assigned to `data_hot` nodes.

Reviewer: I think we need to be a bit more verbose here. I think this is a very important and tricky aspect that maybe even deserves its own section?

. To enable {ilm} to automatically move existing managed indices through the data tiers,

> remove your routing allocation filters from those indices.

Reviewer: I think we need to be a bit more verbose here and link this scenario into the previously described one (where there's a mix of an index template that configures node attributes routing with the `7.10+` releases that default to node roles allocation - https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/data-tiers.html#data-tier-migration and https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/data-tiers.html#data-tier-allocation)
